# Fast Parquet Sort in Pure Java

## What is this?

A tool that reads a parquet file, performs a sort, and writes it to a destination file. It can outperform
DuckDB. Written in pure Java using [ParquetForge](https://github.com/Earnix/parquetforge).

## Why This Matters

- Java can outperform highly optimized ETL tools like DuckDB, especially with GraalVM native-image
- You don’t need C++ or explicit vectorization (SIMD) to get blazing-fast Parquet performance
- [ParquetForge](https://github.com/Earnix/parquetforge) is the missing toolkit to read, write and manipulate Parquet

---

## Why is the code so fast?

### High Level Principles

- Efficient parallelized sort order computation (bucket sort or quicksort)
- Column-wise in-memory reordering
- Parallel processing across row groups
- Parallel final file assembly with copying (and not processing) blocks of data

---

### How it works

#### 1. Sort Order Computation

A mapping from source row indices to destination row indices is computed based on the sort column in
[`SortOrderer.java`](src/main/java/com/earnix/parquet/fastsort/SortOrderer.java):

- If the sort column has a narrow range of values (e.g., dates), bucket sort is used.
- Otherwise, it
  uses [fastutil's parallel quicksort](https://javadoc.io/static/it.unimi.dsi/fastutil/8.5.16/it/unimi/dsi/fastutil/Arrays.html#parallelQuickSort(int,int,it.unimi.dsi.fastutil.ints.IntComparator,it.unimi.dsi.fastutil.Swapper))

In the benchmark case (`l_shipdate`), bucket sort is used due to the limited range of date values.

---

### 2. Column-by-Column Reordering

Parquet is a columnar format, so each column can be processed independently:

- Each column is read into memory in the sorted row order
- Each column chunk in each row group is read in parallel
- The reordered column data is written into temporary Parquet files one per row group in parallel

See: [`ColumnReader.java`](src/main/java/com/earnix/parquet/fastsort/ColumnReader.java)

---

### 3. Row Group Assembly

Parquet requires that all column chunks in a row group be contiguous in the file.
However, the size of each row group is not known until all columns are encoded and compressed.

To work around this:

- Each row group is written to a separate temporary file
- After all row groups are written, Dict and Data Pages they are concatenated into a single output file.
- The Parquet footer metadata is generated to reflect the byte offsets of the row groups.

This approach avoids buffering entire row groups in memory.

---
## Performance Benchmark

### Time to read, sort, and write a 59 million row parquet file

Inspired by [this benchmark](https://www.architecture-performance.fr/ap_blog/parquet-file-sorting).

| Sorting Software              | Time to Sort (SF=10) |
|-------------------------------|----------------------|
| DuckDB 1.3.2                  | 20.54s               |
| Parquet Sort (Corretto 24)    | 18.34s               |
| Parquet Sort (GraalVM 24)     | 24.47s               |
| Parquet Sort (GraalVM Native) | **16.30s**           |

> **Benchmark Environment**  
> OS: Amazon Linux 2023 \
> Kernel: Linux 6.1.147-172.259.amzn2023.x86_64 \
> Instance: EC2 c7i.4xlarge  \
> 16 vCPUs, 32GB RAM  \
> 50GB EBS SSD (gp3, 16,000 IOPS, 1000 MiB/s throughput) \
> Filesystem: XFS

### Run the Benchmarks yourself!

```
git clone https://github.com/Earnix/parquet-sort
cd parquet-sort
./benchmarks.sh
```

See: [benchmarks.sh](benchmarks.sh) - generates the input file and executes the sort benchmark.

This benchmark sorts `lineitem.parquet` as generated by DuckDB's TPC-H benchmark with a scale factor SF of 10,
identical to the source [inspiration](https://www.architecture-performance.fr/ap_blog/parquet-file-sorting).


## Feedback

If you have questions/comments/feedback, I'd love to hear from you. My e-mail is in the git commit log.

## Limitations

Sorting the deprecated `int96` column type is not supported.

This project is a performance demo and not intended for production use.
